Update Swift Style Guide (#26)
bbc/news-weather-apps-playbook: style/swift.md

# iOS Style Guide (Swift)

## Introduction

This style guide is based on the [official raywenderlich.com Swift style guide](https://github.com/raywenderlich/swift-style-guide) but has some changes to better accommodate the practices of our team. We would like to thank [Ray and his team](https://www.raywenderlich.com), and all of those who contributed to their style guide, for creating it in the first place.

Another source of style guidelines is the [API Design Guidelines](https://swift.org/documentation/api-design-guidelines/#include-words-to-avoid-ambiguity). These guidelines are also reflected in this document.

Our primary goals, like theirs, are **clarity**, **consistency**, and **brevity** but also to achieve a sufficiently stable style guide to configure a linter from. Nonetheless, it's a living document that will evolve as our needs change, as well as alongside the Swift language.

### Updates

> For some non-additive changes such as misspellings, grammar or compiler errors, changes to this guide can be performed by simply issuing a pull request. If case the changes are deemed more "controversial", open an issue to clarify the change and to allow discussion within the team so that other members of our team can participate in the discussion. We thank any and all such contributions in advance!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For some non-additive changes such as misspellings, grammar or compiler errors, changes to this guide can be performed by simply issuing a pull request. In cases where the changes are deemed more "controversial", open an issue to clarify the change first, this will allow discussion within the team and other members of the team can participate in the discussion. We thank any and all such contributions in advance!
```

  * [Type Inference](#type-inference)
  * [Syntactic Sugar](#syntactic-sugar)
* [Functions vs Methods](#functions-vs-methods)
* [Memory Management](#memory-management)
  * [Extending Object Lifetime](#extending-object-lifetime)
* [Access Control](#access-control)
* [Control Flow](#control-flow)
  * [Ternary Operator](#ternary-operator)
* [Golden Path](#golden-path)
  * [Failing Guards](#failing-guards)
* [Semicolons](#semicolons)
* [Parentheses](#parentheses)
* [Multi-line String Literals](#multi-line-string-literals)
* [Copyright Statement](#copyright-statement)
* [References](#references)
* [SwiftLint rules](#swiftlint-rules)

## Correctness

Strive to make your code compile without warnings. This rule informs many style decisions such as using `#selector` types instead of string literals.

## Naming

Descriptive and consistent naming makes software easier to read and understand. Use the Swift naming conventions described in the [API Design Guidelines](https://swift.org/documentation/api-design-guidelines/). Some key takeaways include:

- striving for clarity at the call site
- prioritizing clarity over brevity
- using `camelCase` (not `snake_case`)

> - using `UpperCamelCase` for types and protocols, `lowerCamelCase` for everything else
> - [using `UpperCamelCase` for names of types and protocols. Everything else is `lowerCamelCase`.](https://swift.org/documentation/api-design-guidelines/#follow-case-conventions)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [using `UpperCamelCase` for types and protocols, `lowerCamelCase` for everything else.](https://swift.org/documentation/api-design-guidelines/#follow-case-conventions)
```

> - [including all needed words while omitting needless words](https://swift.org/documentation/api-design-guidelines/#include-words-to-avoid-ambiguity)
> - including all needed words while omitting needless words

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [including all needed words while omitting needless words](https://swift.org/documentation/api-design-guidelines/#include-words-to-avoid-ambiguity)
```

personally I prefer:

```suggestion
- [including all necessary words while omitting redundant and superfluous ones](https://swift.org/documentation/api-design-guidelines/#include-words-to-avoid-ambiguity)
```

- using names based on roles, not types
- sometimes compensating for weak type information
- striving for fluent usage
- beginning factory methods with `make`
- naming methods for their side effects
  - verb methods follow the -ed, -ing rule for the non-mutating version
  - noun methods follow the formX rule for the mutating version
  - boolean types should read like assertions (`isLoading`, `isHidden`, `isFalse`, etc)
  - protocols that describe _what something is_ should read as nouns
  - protocols that describe _a capability_ should end in _-able_ or _-ible_
- using terms that don't surprise experts or confuse beginners

> - generally avoiding abbreviations, although a few well-known ones are allowed, such as, `HTML`, `HTTP`, `URL`, and `ID`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- generally avoiding abbreviations and acronyms, although a few well-known ones are allowed, such as, `HTML`, `HTTP`, `URL`, and `ID`.
```

> - using precedent for names

Reviewer: what does this mean?

**Preferred**:
```swift
let selector = #selector(viewDidLoad)
view.backgroundColor = .red
let toView = context.view(forKey: .to)
let view = UIView(frame: .zero)
```

**Not Preferred**:
```swift
let selector = #selector(ViewController.viewDidLoad)
view.backgroundColor = UIColor.red
let toView = context.view(forKey: UITransitionContextViewKey.to)
let view = UIView(frame: CGRect.zero)
```

### Generics

Generic type parameters should be descriptive, upper camel-case names. When a type name doesn't have a meaningful relationship or role, use a traditional single uppercase letter such as `T`, `U`, or `V`.

**Preferred**:
```swift
struct Stack<Element> { ... }
func write<Target: OutputStream>(to target: inout Target)
func swap<T>(_ a: inout T, _ b: inout T)
```

**Not Preferred**:
```swift
struct Stack<T> { ... }
func write<target: OutputStream>(to target: inout target)
func swap<Thing>(_ a: inout Thing, _ b: inout Thing)
```

### Language

Use US English spelling to match Apple's API.

**Preferred**:
```swift
let color = "red"
```

**Not Preferred**:
```swift
let colour = "red"
```

## Code Organization

> Use extensions to organize your code into logical blocks of functionality. Add `MARK`s if they help with it.

Reviewer: Not sure why you'd use extensions for this? Extensions have a functional purpose e.g. extending objects from third party frameworks or the standard framework which we don't have access to or prefer to not edit directly. It is also used for extending protocols to provide polymorphism without inheritance.

Using them for protocol adherence can be useful, and also for separating object code across files. But to use them to organize code when we already have `//MARK` (which is actually more useful in xcode) doesn't make sense and just adds noise.

Although I don't strongly object to using `extension` to organise code, I wouldn't go out of my way to promote it's usage in that way (it seems like a classic case of "when you're holding a hammer, everything looks like a nail").

Reviewer 2: I agree with Daniel

}

override func numberOfSections(in tableView: UITableView) -> Int {
  // #warning Incomplete implementation, return the number of sections
  return 1
}

override func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, numberOfRowsInSection section: Int) -> Int {
  // #warning Incomplete implementation, return the number of rows
  return Database.contacts.count
}
```

### Minimal Imports

Import only the modules a source file requires. For example, don't import `UIKit` when importing `Foundation` will suffice. Likewise, don't import `Foundation` if you must import `UIKit`.

**Preferred**:
```
import UIKit
var view: UIView
var deviceModels: [String]
```

**Preferred**:
```
import Foundation
var deviceModels: [String]
```

**Not Preferred**:
```
import UIKit
import Foundation
var view: UIView
var deviceModels: [String]
```

**Not Preferred**:
```
import UIKit
var deviceModels: [String]
```

## Spacing

* Use Xcode's defaults values. The default settings are to indent using 4 spaces rather than tabs to conserve space and help prevent line wrapping. Be sure to set this preference in Xcode and in the Project settings as shown below:

![Xcode indent settings](screens/indentation.png)

> * Method braces and other braces (`if`/`else`/`switch`/`while` etc.) always open on the same line as the statement but close on a new line.

Reviewer: what about 1 liners? e.g.
```
        var isReachable: Bool { isReachableOnCellular || isReachableOnEthernetOrWiFi }
        var isReachableOnCellular: Bool { status == .reachable(.cellular) }
        var isReachableOnEthernetOrWiFi: Bool { status == .reachable(.ethernetOrWiFi) }
```

### Use of Self

For conciseness, avoid using `self` since Swift does not require it to access an object's properties or invoke its methods.

Use self only when required by the compiler (in `@escaping` closures, or in initializers to disambiguate properties from arguments). In other words, if it compiles without `self` then omit it.

### Computed Properties

For conciseness, if a computed property is read-only, omit the get clause. The get clause is required only when a set clause is provided. For single-expressions where the context is clear, both explicit and implicit returns can be used:

**Preferred**:
```swift
var diameter: Double { radius * 2 }

// Or

var diameter: Double {
  return radius * 2
}
```

**Not Preferred**:
```swift
var diameter: Double {
  get {
    return radius * 2
  }
}
```

> ### Final

Reviewer: We can add to this, or refine it to be more like [this](https://github.com/bbc/news-app-ios/blob/dev/iOSCodingGuide.md#final-classes)

Mark classes or members as `final` when appropriate. In the below example, `Box` has a particular purpose and customization in a derived class is not intended. Marking it `final` makes that clear.

```swift
// Turn any generic type into a reference type using this Box class.
final class Box<T> {
  let value: T
  init(_ value: T) {
    self.value = value
  }
}
```

## Functions

### Declarations

Keep short function declarations on one line including the opening brace:

```swift
func reticulateSplines(spline: [Double]) -> Bool {
  // reticulate code goes here
}
```

> For functions with long signatures, more than the recommended length, put each parameter on a new line and add an extra indent on subsequent lines.

Reviewer: I've noticed use of the objective C style alignment of function parameters in the news and sports apps codebases, e.g.

```
func doThisThing(firstParameter: Int,
                 secondParameter: String,
                 thirdParameter: AnObject) -> Food {
```

vs. the Swift style:

```
func doThisThing(
    firstParamter: Int,
    secondParameter: String,    
    thirdParameter: AnObject
) -> Food {

```

My preference is the Swift style. Can we be explicit here in the style guide and enforce one or the other?

```swift
func reticulateSplines(
    spline: [Double], 
    adjustmentFactor: Double,
    translateConstant: Int, 
    comment: String
) -> Bool {
  // reticulate code goes here
}
```

Don't use `(Void)` to represent the lack of an input; simply use `()`.
Use `Void` instead of `()` for closure outputs.
Don't use `Void` for function outputs as it is redundant.

**Preferred**:

```swift
func updateConstraints() {
  // magic happens here
}

typealias CompletionHandler = (result) -> Void
```

**Not Preferred**:

```swift
func updateConstraints() -> () {
  // magic happens here
}

typealias CompletionHandler = (result) -> ()
```

> For single-expression functions where the context is clear, both explicit and implicit returns can be used:

Reviewer: It's tempting to try and aim for consistency by being more strict here. e.g. `where implicit returns are possible they should be used unless apparent it will cause confusion.`

```swift
func encode(character: Character) -> String {
    character.encoded()
}

// Or

func encode(character: Character) -> String {
    return character.encoded()
}
```

### Calls

Mirror the style of function declarations at call sites. Calls that fit on a single line should be written as such:

```swift
let success = reticulateSplines(splines)
```

If the call site must be wrapped, put each parameter on a new line, indented one additional level:

```swift

> let success = reticulateSplines(
>   spline: splines,
>   adjustmentFactor: 1.3,
>   translateConstant: 2,
>   comment: "normalize the display")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
let success = reticulateSplines(
  spline: splines,
  adjustmentFactor: 1.3,
  translateConstant: 2,
  comment: "normalize the display"
)
```

```

## Closure Expressions

Use trailing closure syntax only if there's a single closure expression parameter at the end of the argument list. Give the closure parameters descriptive names.

**Preferred**:
```swift
UIView.animate(withDuration: 1.0) {
  self.myView.alpha = 0
}

UIView.animate(withDuration: 1.0, animations: {
  self.myView.alpha = 0
}, completion: { finished in
  self.myView.removeFromSuperview()
})
```

**Not Preferred**:
```swift
UIView.animate(withDuration: 1.0, animations: {
  self.myView.alpha = 0
})

UIView.animate(withDuration: 1.0, animations: {
  self.myView.alpha = 0
}) { f in
  self.myView.removeFromSuperview()
}
```

For single-expression closures where the context is clear, use implicit returns:

```swift
attendeeList.sort { a, b in
  a > b
}
```

Chained methods using trailing closures should be clear and easy to read in context. Moreover, they should go one per line. Example:

```swift

> let value = numbers.map { $0 * 2 }.filter { $0 % 3 == 0 }.index(of: 90)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
should this line be in a "not preferred" section?

**Preferred**:
```swift
enum Math {
  static let e = 2.718281828459045235360287
  static let sqrt2 = 1.41421356237309504880168872
}

let hypotenuse = side * Math.sqrt2

```
**Note:** The advantage of using a case-less enumeration is that it can't accidentally be instantiated and works as a pure namespace.

**Not Preferred**:
```swift
let e = 2.718281828459045235360287  // pollutes global namespace
let sqrt2 = 1.41421356237309504880168872

let hypotenuse = side * sqrt2 // what is root2?
```

### Static Methods and Variable Type Properties

Static methods and type properties work similarly to global functions and global variables and should be used sparingly. They are useful when functionality is scoped to a particular type or when Objective-C interoperability is required.

### Optionals

Declare variables and function return types as optional with `?` where a `nil` value is acceptable.

> Use implicitly unwrapped types declared with `!` only for instance variables that you know will be initialized later before use, such as subviews that will be set up in `viewDidLoad()`. Prefer optional binding to implicitly unwrapped optionals in most other cases.

Reviewer: Not sure it's a good idea to have implicitly unwrapped in `viewDidLoad()`

We should maybe swap this out for [this](https://github.com/bbc/news-app-ios/blob/dev/iOSCodingGuide.md#forced-unwrap) from the news app repo style guide.

  print(index)
}

for index in (0...3).reversed() {
  print(index)
}
```

**Not Preferred**:
```swift
var i = 0
while i < 3 {
  print("Hello three times")
  i += 1
}

var i = 0
while i < attendeeList.count {
  let person = attendeeList[i]
  print("\(person) is at position #\(i)")
  i += 1
}
```

### Ternary Operator

The Ternary operator, `?:` , should only be used when it increases clarity or code neatness. A single condition is usually all that should be evaluated. Evaluating multiple conditions is usually more understandable as an `if` statement or refactored into instance variables. In general, the best use of the ternary operator is during assignment of a variable and deciding which value to use.

**Preferred**:

```swift
let value = 5
result = value != 0 ? x : y

let isHorizontal = true
result = isHorizontal ? x : y
```

**Not Preferred**:

```swift
result = a > b ? x = c > d ? c : d : y
```

## Golden Path

When coding with conditionals, the left-hand margin of the code should be the "golden" or "happy" path. That is, don't nest `if` statements. Multiple return statements are OK. The `guard` statement is built for this.

**Preferred**:
```swift

> func computeFFT(context: Context?, inputData: InputData?) throws -> Frequencies {

Reviewer: A few of these examples have flipped to using 2 space indentation rather than 4.

2 is probably a better choice but we've said to use 4 during the first parts of this document.
